---
title: Anxiety
date created: Tuesday, June 13th 2023, 7:34:33 pm
date modified: Wednesday, June 14th 2023, 12:51:57 am
---

# Anxiety

Renew Your Perception on reality.
Anxiety is conspiracy theories about oneself.
**He who fears, he shall suffer, already suffers what he fears.**

## Anxiety is Essential

Experiencing anxiety is essential for a successful life, for without it one could not advance. Author notes, Whoever is educated by anxiety is educated by possibility. Freud feels anxiety is born out of a need to keep impulses based on stressful thoughts and memories, mostly about childhood, out of consciousness. Through the defence mechanism of repression, these impulses are hidden in the unconscious mind. When repression fails, the troubling impulses reach consciousness, and neurotic anxiety results. The impulses then need to be repressed again or satiated through neurotic enactments to relieve anxiety.

## Memories Are Coloured

Our conscious experiences are personal. Every man’s memory is his private literature. They are yours, and could not exist without you. And a major fact that makes them personal is that they are experienced and interpreted through the lens of your memories. Conscious experiences, including experiences of fear and anxiety, are coloured by memory

We live only a few decades, and we fret ourselves enough for several lifetimes. **Anxiety’s like a rocking chair. It gives you something to do, but it doesn’t get you very far.**

You can even recognise an apple in a photograph or painting, or even in a crude line drawing. This conceptual knowledge extends to all things about apples: that they are edible, and that you can eat them as is or turn them into applesauce or juice or make a pie with them; **semantic memories** involve knowledge you have about a thing or situation that does not personally involve you. **Episodic memories** are those in which YOU have a personal involvement Episodic memory thus depends upon and builds on semantic memory. Second, episodic memories are also said to involve mental time travel

We mentally travel to both the experienced past and the imagined future.
**Factual**: I know.
**Personal**: I remember.
You’re not me. You can’t feel like I feel. Qualities of what it’s like to be in that emotional personal experience, are different from those of a nonemotional experience

## Pain from Anxiety

Anxiety is not painful. The pain you feel is not coming from the anxious thoughts of your mind but from a sense of alarm stored in your body. Alarm is a combination of misaligned energy of your fight-or-flight sympathetic nervous system, with an activating energy originating from unresolved emotional pain that has been repressed within your body. If you struggle with anxiety, your worry aggravates the alarm in your body, and it is the sense of alarm that is the source of your discomfort. Just because worries activate the alarm does not mean the worries are the cause.

We must replace the emotional pain. This is the root cause of all troubles If the pursuit fails and, despite our best efforts, we still feel separate from our attachment figures, the alarm intensifies and the body stays in a state of alarm for an extended period. If we don’t have access to a caregiver that can love and calm us, that alarm state becomes stored in our bodies. This alarm energy became a chronic state in my body, where it would energize more false, worrisome thoughts in my mind. At the same time, the alarm energy would create a sense of my survival being threatened, which would impair my brain’s ability to recognise those thoughts as false.

## Worrying

Worrying is a habit that gives the illusion of certainty but comes at a tremendous cost. Not willing to let them go, as you falsely believe those worries are protecting my mental health couldn’t take practicing medicine anymore. Without knowing you have an option to see things another way, you assume your singular perception of the world is how the world actually is. You never think to question your perceptions because you have never seen any reason to question your own experience and your interpretations of those experiences

### Do not Choose to Be a Victim

In going from unconscious to conscious awareness, you go from daydreaming to awake, from past or future to present. In fact, the hallmark of conscious awareness is that it brings you firmly into the present moment. You have every right to feel victimised by life. But in the end, it doesn’t matter how you came to be a victim. As an adult, you have a choice to continue seeing yourself (and your life and the world) that way or to develop awareness of how you continue to victimise yourself and turn it around. A lack of self-care is very common in people who struggle with anxiety and alarm

### Imagined Future

Anxiety and worry are generated by an overactive imagination of the future. Since the future hasn’t yet happened and is strictly in the realm of the imagined, anxiety is by definition about something that is not real. Anxiety is a thinking process.

### 3 W’s Of Worry

3 W’s of worry—warnings, what-ifs, and worst-case scenarios—in a further effort to keep ourselves safe. We cease to be able to see our anxious thoughts as simply thoughts We forget it is we who are making up this story

You can’t harden your heart to one person without compromising your ability to love all people It is not possible to numb yourself to love in one area of your life without it affecting you globally.

**You can’t dig yourself out of a hole. When you are in a hole, stop digging.**

If there is nothing you can do about your worry, you need not worry—and if there is something you can do about your worry, you need not worry either

**If you change the way you look at things, the things you look at change.**

## Letting Go

[Notes on Letting Go Elsewhere](Mental-Wellness/Acceptance.md#Letting%20Go%20)
Letting go of the past and acceptance Forgive your past self, you’ve changed.

## Distorting Reality

With a right attitude, facts do not matter.
Fact could be loss of spouse, failing at university, breakup, short height.
We hear or see the fact. We put a frame around the fact
Frames put focus on a fact in the brain. Frames manufacture beliefs.
Beliefs manifest as faith or doubt. Beliefs can be changed. Beliefs also travel and cause feelings in the heart.

Emotion is an energy in motion. It either mobilises our immobilises us.
Anticipation is borrowing future energy from thinking of an desirable outcome.
Anxiety is wasting present energy on a future outcome that is undesirable to me.
Anxiety tastes and feels like fear. Fear is caution over real and present danger. Anxiety is fear over some imaginary negative outcome
