---
title: Regulating Dopamine
date created: Monday, June 12th 2023, 7:39:56 pm
date modified: Monday, June 12th 2023, 7:42:34 pm
---

# Regulating Dopamine

This note is not formatted properly yet. It is a dump of of kindle highlights of the book [Dopamine Nation: Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/55723020-dopamine-nation)

- we basically rely on dopamine to measure every experience today
- did you know that brain processes pleasure and pain in the same part?
- the secret to finding balance is combining the science of desire with the wisdom of recovery.
- we sometimes tend to have overpowering compulsive needs to drift off into fantasy/delusional worlds. We notice this with people addicted to anything - like food, sex, drugs. they keep wanting more and more stimuli.
- One of the biggest risk factors for getting addicted to any drug is easy access to that drug. When it’s easier to get a drug, we’re more likely to try it. In trying it, we’re more likely to get addicted to it.
- It is always unclear - if the mental illness leads to overuse of drugs or if drug usage causes mental illnesses or is it somewhat in between?
- The act of consumption itself has become a drug
- “Twitter” is an apt name for the social media messaging platform favored by pundits and presidents alike. We are like flocks of birds.
- Seventy percent of world global deaths are attributable to modifiable behavioral risk factors like smoking, physical inactivity, and diet.
- Our compulsive overconsumption risks not just our demise but also that of our planet. The world’s natural resources are rapidly diminishing. Economists estimate that in 2040 the world’s natural capital (land, forests, fisheries, fuels) will be 21 percent less in high-income countries and 17 percent less in poorer countries than today. Meanwhile, carbon emissions will grow by 7 percent in high-income countries and 44 percent in the rest of the world. We are devouring ourselves.
- David - in the end, it came down to comfort. It was easier to take the pill than bear the pain.
- Over the past three decades, I have seen growing numbers of patients like David and Kevin who appear to have every advantage in life—supportive families, quality education, financial stability, good health—yet develop debilitating anxiety, depression, and physical pain. Not only are they not functioning to their potential; they’re barely able to get out of bed in the morning. (hedonism?)
- Beyond extreme examples of running from pain, we’ve lost the ability to tolerate even minor forms of discomfort. We’re constantly seeking to distract ourselves from the present moment, to be entertained.
- Boredom is not just boring. It can also be terrifying. It forces us to come face-to-face with bigger questions of meaning and purpose. But boredom is also an opportunity for discovery and invention. It creates the space necessary for a new thought to form, without which we’re endlessly reacting to stimuli around us, rather than allowing ourselves to be within our lived experience.
- I’ve seen a similar paradox in many of my patients over the years: They use drugs, prescribed or otherwise, to compensate for a basic lack of self-care, then attribute the costs to a mental illness, thus necessitating the need for more drugs. Hence poisons become vitamins.
- We’re all running from pain. Some of us take pills. Some of us couch surf while binge-watching Netflix. Some of us read romance novels. We’ll do almost anything to distract ourselves from ourselves. Yet all this trying to insulate ourselves from pain seems only to have made our pain worse.
- The question is: Why, in a time of unprecedented wealth, freedom, technological progress, and medical advancement, do we appear to be unhappier and in more pain than ever? The reason we’re all so miserable may be because we’re working so hard to avoid being miserable.
- Dopamine may play a bigger role in the motivation to get a reward than the pleasure of the reward itself. _Wanting_ more than _liking_.
- Amphetamine, the active ingredient in the street drugs “speed,” “ice,” and “shabu” as well as in medications like Adderall that are used to treat attention deficit disorder, increases the release of dopamine by 1,000 percent. By this accounting, one hit off a meth pipe is equal to ten orgasms.
- But here’s the important thing about the balance: It wants to remain level, that is, in equilibrium. It does not want to be tipped for very long to one side or another. Hence, every time the balance tips toward pleasure, powerful self-regulating mechanisms kick into action to bring it level again. These self-regulating mechanisms do not require conscious thought or an act of will. They just happen, like a reflex - the work of _homeostasis_: the tendency of any living system to maintain physiologic equilibrium.
- We’ve all experienced craving in the aftermath of pleasure. Whether it’s reaching for a second potato chip or clicking the link for another round of video games, it’s natural to want to re-create those good feelings or try not to let them fade away. The simple solution is to keep eating, or playing, or watching, or reading. But there’s a problem with that. With repeated exposure to the same or similar pleasure stimulus, the initial deviation to the side of pleasure gets weaker and shorter and the after-response to the side of pain gets stronger and longer, a process scientists call _neuroadaptation_.
- heavy, prolonged consumption of high-dopamine substances eventually leads to a dopamine deficit state. Once this happens, nothing feels good anymore.
- Here’s the good news. If we wait long enough, our brains (usually) readapt to the absence of the drug and we reestablish our baseline homeostasis: a level balance. Once our balance is level, we are again able to take pleasure in everyday, simple rewards. Going for a walk. Watching the sun rise. Enjoying a meal with friends.
- Right after the conditioned cue, brain dopamine firing decreases not just to baseline levels (the brain has a tonic level of dopamine firing even in the absence of rewards), but below baseline levels. This transient dopamine mini-deficit state is what motivates us to seek out our reward. Dopamine levels below baseline drive craving.
- Which is to say, if we get the expected reward, we get an even bigger spike. If we don’t get the expected reward, we experience an even bigger plunge.
- My patients with gambling addiction have told me that while playing, a part of them wants to lose. The more they lose, the stronger the urge to continue gambling, and the stronger the rush when they win—a phenomenon described as “loss chasing.”
- Learning also increases dopamine firing in the brain.
- Without pleasure we wouldn’t eat, drink, or reproduce. Without pain we wouldn’t protect ourselves from injury and death. By raising our neural set point with repeated pleasures, we become endless strivers, never satisfied with what we have, always looking for more.

SELF BINDING - chapter II

- She was the picture of health despite the fact that she was ingesting more than a gram of cannabis a day. Youth, I thought, compensates for so much.
- First, most of us are unable to see the full extent of the consequences of our drug use while we’re still using. High-dopamine substances and behaviors cloud our ability to accurately assess cause and effect.
- “The world is sensory rich and causal poor.” That is to say, we know the doughnut tastes good in the moment, but we are less aware that eating a doughnut every day for a month adds five pounds to our waistline.
- Any reward that is potent enough to overcome the gremlins and tip the balance toward pleasure can itself be addictive, thereby resulting in trading one addiction for another (cross addiction). Any reward that is not potent enough won’t feel like a reward, which is why when we’re consuming highdopamine rewards, we lose the ability to take joy in ordinary pleasures.
- Mindfulness practices are especially important in the early days of abstinence. Many of us use high-dopamine substances and behaviors to distract ourselves from our own thoughts. When we first stop using dopamine to escape, those painful thoughts, emotions, and sensations come crashing down on us.
- The trick is to stop running away from painful emotions, and instead allow ourselves to tolerate them. When we’re able to do this, our experience takes on a new and unexpectedly rich texture. The pain is still there, but somehow transformed, seeming to encompass a vast landscape of communal suffering, rather than being wholly our own.
- _Self-binding_ is the term to describe Jacob’s act of throwing out his machine. It is the way we intentionally and willingly create barriers between ourselves and our drug of choice in order to mitigate compulsive overconsumption. Self-binding is not primarily a matter of will, although personal agency plays some part. Rather, self-binding openly recognizes the limitations of will.
- Physical self-binding: But I warned you that self-binding is no guarantee. Sometimes the barrier itself becomes an invitation to a challenge. Solving the puzzle of how to get our drug of choice becomes part of its appeal.
- Chronological self-binding: By restricting consumption to certain times of the day, week, month, or year, we narrow our window of consumption and thereby limit our use. When we make conscious use of objective facts like how much time we’re using, we are less able to deny them, and therefore in a better position to take action. However, this can get very tricky very fast. Time has a funny way of getting away from us when we’re chasing dopamine.
- High-dopamine goods mess with our ability to delay gratification, a phenomenon called _delay discounting._ This phenomenon refers to how sometimes we feel like the value of a reward goes down the longer we wait for it. This is a tendency to value short-term rewards over long-term rewards.
- “temporal horizons” shrink when we’re under the sway of an addictive drug
- They found that when participants chose immediate rewards, emotionand reward-processing parts of the brain lit up. When participants delayed their reward, the prefrontal cortex—the part of the brain involved in planning and abstract thinking—became active. The implication here is that we are all now vulnerable to prefrontal cortical atrophy as our reward pathway has become the dominant driver of our lives.
- “Your entire existence can be reduced to a three-part cycle. One: Get fucked up. Two: Fuck up. Three: Damage control.”
- Categorical self-binding: limits consumption of dopamine into sub-categories. Those we allow ourselves to consume and those we do not. This method can help not only with limiting drug of choice but the triggers that cause cravings themselves. This strategy is most useful for drugs we can’t completely avoid in this world - food, sex, smartphones, etc.
- There’s something tragic and touching about having to ban yourself.
- But diets as a form of categorical self-binding are threatened when the category changes over time as a result of market forces. But growing numbers of people are gluten-free because it helps them limit consumption of high-calorie, low-nutrition carbohydrates. The problem? Around 3,000 new gluten-free snack products were introduced in the US from 2008 to 2010, and bakery products are the single highest-grossing packaged-good category in the gluten-free market today. There are many other modern examples of previously taboo drugs beingtransformed into socially acceptable commodities, often in the guise of medicines. Cigarettes became vape pens and ZYN pouches. Heroin became OxyContin. Cannabis became “medical marijuana.” No sooner have we committed to abstinence than our old drug reappears as a nicely packaged, affordable new product saying, _Hey! This is okay. I’m good for you now._
- She removed all alcohol save one beer, which she left in her refrigerator. She called it her “totemic beer,” which she regarded as the symbol of her choice not to drink, a representation of her will and autonomy. She told herself that she only needed to focus on not drinking that one beer rather than the more daunting task of not drinking any beer from the vast quantity available in the world. This metacognitive sleight of hand, transforming an object of temptation into a symbol of restraint, helped Jasmine abstain.
- Notes: I have previously done this myself. I’d keep one bar of chocolate in the room and look at it everyday and not eat it. By doing this, I made my will power stronger everyday. Now, when I go outside and to restaurants and hand with friends. I don’t have the immediate need to indulge in chocolate because I’ve been abstaining myself for a while all on my own.
- As Immanuel Kant wrote in _The Metaphysics of Morals_, “When we realize that we are capable of this inner legislation, the (natural) man feels himself compelled to reverence for the moral man in his own person.”

Binding ourselves is a way to be free.

- In context of buprenorphine used to regulate hormones - Perhaps some people’s brains lose the plasticity necessary to restore homeostasis, even after prolonged abstinence. Perhaps even after the gremlins dismount, their balance remains permanently weighted to the side of pain.
- Recent data show that even antidepressants, previously thought not to be “habit forming,” may lead to tolerance and dependence, and possibly even make depression worse over the long haul, a phenomenon called _tardive dysphoria._
- One patient who seemed to be doing well on antidepressants told me she no longer cried at Olympics commercials. She laughed when she talked about it, happily forfeiting the sentimental side of her personality for relief from depression and anxiety. But when she couldn’t even cry at her own mother’s funeral, the balance for her had tipped. She went off antidepressants and a short time later experienced a wider emotional amplitude, including more depression and anxiety. She decided the lows were worth it to feel human.
- Today, I’m finally okay with being a somewhat anxious, slightly depressed skeptic. I’m a person who needs friction, a challenge, something to work for or fight against. I won’t whittle myself down to fit the world. Should any of us?
- there is an alternative path that might work better: embracing pain.

**Pursuit of pain:**

Ice water therapy: it is advocated to try cold water / ice water bathing. It is suggested to even end hot water showers with cold water. Dopamine rose gradually and steadily over the course of the cold bath and remained elevated for an hour afterward. Norepinephrine rose precipitously in the first thirty minutes, plateaued in the latter thirty minutes, and dropped by about a third in the hour afterward, but it remained elevated well above baseline even into the second hour after the bath.

- Michael’s accidental discovery of the benefits of ice-cold water immersion is an example of how pressing on the pain side of the balance can lead to its opposite—pleasure.
- Pain leads to pleasure by triggering the body’s own regulating homeostatic mechanisms. In this case, the initial pain stimulus is followed by gremlins hopping on the pleasure side of the balance.
- With intermittent exposure to pain, our natural hedonic set point gets weighted to the side of pleasure, such that we become less vulnerable to pain and more able to feel pleasure over time.
- We’ve all experienced some version of pain giving way to pleasure. Perhaps like Socrates, you’ve noticed an improved mood after a period of being ill, or felt a runner’s high after exercise, or took inexplicable pleasure in a scary movie. Just as pain is the price we pay for pleasure, so too is pleasure our reward for pain.
- Intermittent fasting and calorie restriction extended lifespan and increased resistance to age-related diseases in rodents and monkeys, as well as reduced blood pressure and increased heart rate variability.
- Exercise is immediately toxic to cells, leading to increased temperatures, noxious oxidants, and oxygen and glucose deprivation. Yet the evidence is overwhelming that exercise is health-promoting, and the absence of exercise, especially combined with chronic sedentary feeding—eating too much all day long—is deadly.
- Exercise increases many of the neurotransmitters involved in positive mood regulation: dopamine, serotonin, norepinephrine, epinephrine, endocannabinoids, and endogenous opioid peptides (endorphins). Exercise contributes to the birth of new neurons and supporting glial cells. Exercise even reduces the likelihood of using and getting addicted to drugs.
- A key to well-being is for us to get off the couch and move our real bodies, not our virtual ones. As I tell my patients, just walking in your neighborhood for thirty minutes a day can make a difference. That’s because the evidence is indisputable: Exercise has a more profound and sustained positive effect on mood, anxiety, cognition, energy, and sleep than any pill I can prescribe. But pursuing pain is harder than pursuing pleasure. It goes against our innate reflex to avoid pain and pursue pleasure. It adds to our cognitive load: We have to _remember_ that we will feel pleasure after pain, and we’re remarkably amnestic about this sort of thing. I know I have to relearn the lessons of pain every morning as I force myself to get out of bed and go exercise.
- As the philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche famously said, a sentiment echoed by many before and after through the ages, “What doesn’t kill me makes me stronger.”
- What’s different now is that he has trained his brain through years of climbing not to react to fearful stimuli. It takes a lot more to scare Honnold’s brain than the average person’s because he has incrementally exposed himself to death-defying feats.
- Pain to treat pain. Anxiety to treat anxiety. This approach is counterintuitive, and exactly opposite to what we’ve been taught over the last 150 years about how to manage disease, distress, and discomfort.
- Extreme sports—skydiving, kitesurfing, hang gliding, bobsledding, downhill skiing/snowboarding, waterfall kayaking, ice climbing, mountain biking, canyon swinging, bungee jumping, base jumping, wingsuit flying— slam down hard and fast on the pain side of the pleasure-pain balance. Intense pain/fear plus a shot of adrenaline creates a potent drug.
- Scientists have shown that stress alone can increase the release of dopamine in the brain’s reward pathway, leading to the same brain changes seen with addictive drugs like cocaine and methamphetamine. Just as we become tolerant to pleasure stimuli with repeated exposure, so too can we become tolerant to painful stimuli, resetting our brains to the side of pain.
- A study of skydivers compared to a control group (rowers) found that repeat skydivers were more likely to experience anhedonia, a lack of joy, in the rest of their lives.
- People who lean too hard and too long on the pain side of the balance can also end up in a persistent dopamine deficit state.
- Too much pain, or in too potent a form, can increase the risk of becoming addicted to pain, something I’ve witnessed in clinical practice. A patient of mine ran so much she developed fractures in her leg bones and even then didn’t stop running. Another patient cut her inner forearms and thighs with a razor blade to feel a rush and to calm the constant ruminations of her mind. She couldn’t stop cutting even at the risk of severe scarring and infection.

Addicted to work:

- The result is a “work-hard/play-hard” mentality in which compulsive overconsumption becomes the reward at the end of a day of drudgery.
- It’s no wonder, then, that those with less than a high school education in low-paying jobs are working less than ever, whereas highly educated wage earners are working more.
- I find it difficult at times to stop myself from working once I’ve begun. The “flow” of deep concentration is a drug in itself, releasing dopamine and creating its own high. This kind of single-minded focus, although heavily rewarded in modern rich nations, can be a trap when it keeps us from the intimate connections with friends and family in the rest of our lives.
- “I don’t really like the feeling of being alive. Drugs and alcohol were a way to like it. Now I can’t do that anymore. When I see people partying, I’m still a little bit jealous of the escape they’re getting. I can see they get the reprieve. Cold water reminds me that being alive can feel good.”
- If we consume too much pain, or in too potent a form, we run the risk of compulsive, destructive overconsumption. But if we consume just the right amount, “inhibiting great pain with little pain,” we discover the path to hormetic healing, and maybe even the occasional “fit of joy.”

Radical honesty:

- All my patients who have achieved long-term recovery have relied on truth-telling as critical for sustained mental and physical health. I too have become convinced that radical honesty is not just helpful for limiting compulsive overconsumption but also at the core of a life well lived.
- Let’s first establish that telling the truth is painful. We’re wired from the earliest ages to lie, and we all do it, whether or not we care to admit it.
- But lying in a world of plenty risks isolation, craving, and pathological overconsumption. Let me explain.
- The Lying Habit is remarkably easy to fall into. We all engage in regular lying, most of the time without realizing it. Our lies are so small and imperceptible that we convince ourselves we’re telling the truth. Or that it doesn’t matter, even if we know we’re lying.
- Radical honesty—telling the truth about things large and small, especially when doing so exposes our foibles and entails consequences—is essential not just to recovery from addiction but for all of us trying to live a more balanced life in our reward-saturated ecosystem.
- First, radical honesty promotes awareness of our actions. Second, it fosters intimate human connections. Third, it leads to a truthful autobiography, which holds us accountable not just to our present but also to our future selves. Further, telling the truth is contagious, and might even prevent the development of future addiction.
- When I was compulsively reading romance novels, I was only partially aware of doing so. That is to say, I was aware of the behavior at the same time I was not aware of it. This is a well recognized phenomenon in addiction, a kind of half-conscious state akin to a waking dream, often referred to as _denial._
- Denial is likely mediated by a disconnect between the reward pathway part of our brain and the higher cortical brain regions that allow us to narrate the events of our lives, appreciate consequences, and plan for the future.
- He was right. Those were good reasons. In saying them aloud, I realized for the first time how much my behavior was negatively impacting my life and the people I care about.
- Telling the truth draws people in, especially when we’re willing to expose our own vulnerabilities. This is counterintuitive because we assume that unmasking the less desirable aspects of ourselves will drive people away. It logically makes sense that people would distance themselves when they learn about our character flaws and transgressions. In fact, the opposite happens. People come closer. They see in our brokenness their own vulnerability and humanity. They are reassured that they are not alone in their doubts, fears, and weaknesses.
- While truth-telling promotes human attachment, compulsive overconsumption of high-dopamine goods is the antithesis of human attachment. Any behavior that leads to an increase in dopamine has the potential to be exploited. What I’m referring to is a kind of “disclosure porn” that has become prevalent in modern culture, where revealing intimate aspects of our lives becomes a way to manipulate others for a certain type of selfish gratification rather than to foster intimacy through a moment of shared humanity. The line between honest self-disclosure and a manipulative drunkalogue is a fine one, including subtle differences in content, tone, cadence, and affect, but you know it when you see it.
- Patients who tell stories in which they are frequently the victim, seldom bearing responsibility for bad outcomes, are often unwell and remain unwell. They are too busy blaming others to get down to the business of their own recovery. By contrast, when my patients start telling stories that accurately portray their responsibility, I know they’re getting better. The victim narrative reflects a wider societal trend in which we’re all prone to seeing ourselves as the victims of circumstance and deserving of compensation or reward for our suffering. Even when people have been victimized, if the narrative never moves beyond victimhood, it’s difficult for healing to occur.
- But if the therapist can help the patient take responsibility if not for the event itself, then for how they react to it in the here and now, that patient is empowered to move forward with their life.
- I began engaging in the painful process of writing down … yes, writing down on paper and thereby making it very real indeed, my character defects and the ways those had contributed to our strained relationship. As Aeschylus said, “We must suffer, suffer into truth.”
- The truth is, I am anxious and fearful, although few would guess those things about me. I maintain a rigid schedule, a predictable routine, and a slavish adherence to my to-do list, as a way to manage my anxiety. This means that others are often forced to bend to my will and the exigencies of my goals.
- As for my resentment toward my mother for wanting me to be different than I was, I realized with sudden and shocking clarity that I was guilty of the same thing toward her. By demanding that she live up to some idealized vision of what I thought a mother and a grandmother should be, I was able to see only her flaws and none of her good qualities, of which she has many. My own healing contributed to an improvement in my relationship with her. I was less demanding, more forgiving, and less judgmental toward her. I also became aware of the many positive things resulting from our friction, namely, that I am resilient and self-reliant in ways I might not have been had she and I been more compatible.
- When our lived experience diverges from our projected image, we are prone to feel detached and unreal, as fake as the false images we’ve created. Psychiatrists call this feeling _derealization_ and _depersonalization._ It’s a terrifying feeling, which commonly contributes to thoughts of suicide.
- Radical honesty is a way to get there. It tethers us to our existence and makes us feel real in the world. It also lessens the cognitive load required to maintain all those lies, freeing up mental energy to live more spontaneously in the moment.
- When the people around us are reliable and tell us the truth, including keeping promises they’ve made to us, we feel more confident about the world and our own future in it. We feel we can rely not just on them but also on the world to be an orderly, predictable, safe kind of a place. Even in the midst of scarcity, we feel confident that things will turn out okay. This is a plenty mindset. When the people around us lie and don’t keep their promises, we feel less confident about the future. The world becomes a dangerous place that can’t be relied upon to be orderly, predictable, or safe. We go into competitive survival mode and favor short-term gains over long-term ones, independent of actual material wealth. This is a scarcity mindset.
- As we have seen, having too much material wealth can be as bad as having too little. Dopamine overload impairs our ability to delay gratification. Just as it is possible to have a scarcity mindset amidst plenty, it is also possible to have a plenty mindset amidst scarcity. The feeling of plenty comes from a source beyond the material world. Believing in or working toward something outside ourselves, and fostering a life rich in human connectedness and meaning, can function as social glue by giving us a plenty mindset even in the midst of abject poverty. Finding connectedness and meaning requires radical honesty.
- There’s always a part of me that wants to embellish the story just the slightest bit, to make myself look better, or to make an excuse for bad behavior. Now I try hard to fight that urge.

Shame:

- Destructive shame looks like this: Overconsumption leads to shame, which leads to shunning by the group or lying to the group to avoid shunning, both of which result in further isolation, contributing to ongoing consumption as the cycle is perpetuated.
- Prosocial shame is predicated on the idea that shame is useful and important for thriving communities. Without shame, society would descend into chaos. Hence, feeling shame for transgressive behaviors is appropriate and good. Prosocial shame is further predicated on the idea that we are all flawed, capable of making mistakes, and in need of forgiveness.
- The prosocial shame cycle goes like this: Overconsumption leads to shame, which demands radical honesty and leads _not_ to shunning, as we saw with destructive shame, but to acceptance and empathy, coupled with a set of required actions to make amends. The result is increased belonging and decreased consumption.
- When we’re accountable to ourselves, we’re able to hold others accountable. We can leverage shame without shaming.
- Sometimes as parents we think that by hiding our mistakes and imperfections and only revealing our best selves, we’ll teach our children what is right. But this can have the opposite effect, leading children to feel they must be perfect to be lovable.
- Together we reaffirmed as a family that ours is one in which people will make mistakes but not be permanently condemned or cast out. We’re learning and growing together.
- In validating what she already knew to be true—her lack of musical ability—I encouraged her skills at accurate self-appraisal, skills she continues to demonstrate to this day. I also sent the message that we can’t be good at everything, and it’s important to know what you’re good at and what you’re not good at, so you can make wise decisions.
- unlike the rush of dopamine we get from cheap pleasures, the rush we get from true intimacy is adaptive, rejuvenating, and health-promoting.
- We tend to think of shame as a negative, especially at a time when _shaming_ —fat shaming, slut shaming, body shaming, and so on—is such a loaded word and is (rightly) associated with bullying. In our increasingly digital world, social media shaming and its correlate “cancel culture” have become a new form of shunning, a modern twist on the most destructive aspects of shame.
- We’re now comparing ourselves not just to our classmates, neighbors, and coworkers, but to the whole world, making it all too easy to convince ourselves that we should have done more, or gotten more, or just lived differently.

Lessons of the balance:

- So we’re drawn to any of the pleasurable forms of escape that are now available to us: trendy cocktails, the echo chamber of social media, bingewatching reality shows, an evening of Internet porn, potato chips and fast food, immersive video games, second-rate vampire novels … The list really is endless. Addictive drugs and behaviors provide that respite but add to our problems in the long run. What if, instead of seeking oblivion by escaping from the world, we turn toward it? What if instead of leaving the world behind, we immerse ourselves in it?
- I made a conscious decision to reimmerse myself in patient care, focusing on the aspects of my work that had always been rewarding: relationships with my patients over time, and immersion in narrative as a way to bring order to the world. In doing so, I was able to emerge from compulsive romance reading into a more rewarding and meaningful career. I was also more successful in my work, but my success was an unexpected byproduct, not the thing I was seeking.
- I urge you to find a way to immerse yourself fully in the life that you’ve been given. To stop running from whatever you’re trying to escape, and instead to stop, and turn, and face whatever it is.
- We must be willing to move forward despite being uncertain of what lies ahead. We must have faith that actions today that seem to have no impact in the present moment are in fact accumulating in a positive direction, which will be revealed to us only at some unknown time in the future. Healthy practices happen day by day.

1. _The relentless pursuit of pleasure (and avoidance of pain) leads to pain._
2. _Recovery begins with abstinence._
3. _Abstinence resets the brain’s reward pathway and with it our capacity_ _to take joy in simpler pleasures._
4. _Self-binding creates literal and metacognitive space between desire and consumption, a modern necessity in our dopamine-overloaded world._
5. _Medications can restore homeostasis, but consider what we lose by medicating away our pain._
6. _Pressing on the pain side resets our balance to the side of pleasure._
7. _Beware of getting addicted to pain._
8. _Radical honesty promotes awareness, enhances intimacy, and fosters a plenty mindset._
9. _Prosocial shame affirms that we belong to the human tribe._
10. _Instead of running away from the world, we can find escape by immersing ourselves in it._
